okay the next section about tax
molarity is going to be on
molarity we are going to look at
sonali me and other semantic relations I
showed you this example in introduction
there were three different announcements
about the stock market and they all use
different words and yet they meant more
or less the same
so climbed gained and rose mean pretty
much the same in the context of our
stock index going up or down and then on
the right hand side we also looked at
paraphrases which are its best clothes
for its best showing and its highest
levels now the difference between the
left column and the right column is that
in the left one we have synonyms and the
second case we have paraphrases so what
are synonyms this is something that you
may have studied in high school synonyms
are different words and sometimes word
compounds that can have similar meanings
for example the adjectives tepid and
lukewarm have very similar meanings
because they can be substituted for one
another in many different contexts for
example the water was tepid versus the
water was look more they're not exactly
the same there are cases where you want
to use one and not the other but for
practical purposes they can be
substituted in most contexts I mentioned
earlier an example where big and large
can be synonyms in many contexts but not
in all contexts for example there is a
major difference between the big leagues
and large leagues big leagues is an
actual concept whereas large leagues is
not used the verbs to sweat and to
perspire are also near synonyms but they
differ in different things for example
the frequency of use and the context in
which they appear another property of
words is polysemy so polysemy is the
property for words to have multiple
senses this is what you typically see in
a dictionary if you open a dictionary
and you look at the definitions of the
word book you will see that it can refer
to many different things it can be a
literary work for example Anna Karenina
by Tolstoy that's a literary work it can
be a stack of pages which may or may not
be blank for example a notebook it can
be a record of business transactions
think as a bookkeeper you know
bookkeeper is a person who keeps track
of accountant books it can be a record
of bets so a bookmaker is a person who
takes bets and it can also be a list of
buy and sell orders in some financial
market so we're going to buy or sell a
certain stock there's a list of orders
and the whole list is called the book
the other sense is a book that I'm not
going to mention here so the same word
can also have multiple parts of speech
and each of those can have its own set
of senses for example the word book is a
verb now can mean to make a reservation
for or to occupy now the different
senses of the same word don't have to be
equally frequent so the sense forms up
of the word s EE as to watch something
to observe something is very frequent
but the sense of se as the Holy See
we're wholly spelled hol ylc spelled se
e is only used in a very specific
context specifically the Vatican the
Holy See is a special name for the
Vatican some of the senses of a word may
overlap for example the first two senses
of book in the previous slide remember
one was literary work and one was a
stack of pages so when we talk about a
book we may say bring me the book from
the shelf we are really talking about
the stack of pages but we can also be
thinking about the work of literature
instead
that's why different dictionaries have
different sets of words answers for the
same work in some cases there may be a
difference between the two senses of a
word like title and in other
dictionaries they may be conflated so a
little joke here somebody said my
favorite books are Anna Karenina and my
father's checkbook so you see in this
case we have two very different kinds of
books that are clumped together
now some words can be very highly
polysemous according to word net which
we're going to discuss in the next few
slides the verb get has at least 35
different meanings many other words in
English have many meanings for example
words like door put have also dozens of
meetings there are other semantic
relationships that are interesting to
natural language processing for example
Antoni me and Ptolemy or antonyms means
near opposites so
for example the word raised as it raised
the bar is an antonym of lower as in
lower the bar
another semantic relationship is hyper
enemy hyponym is a more general concept
than another so for example a deer is a
more general concept than an elk
I Pony me is the opposite have happen to
me in that case we have a word that is a
more specific instance of another word
so an elk is a hyponym for deer and one
more concept is Moroni me there are two
kinds of memory me a membership Moroni
me in part Moroni me membership Moroni
me refers to words like flock which
includes a bunch of sheep or possibly a
bunch of birds that's an example of
membership Moroni me and partner only me
refers to the relationship between the
table and its legs because a table
includes or has legs semantic relations
hold between words senses are not
between words for example the antonym of
the word hot can be either mild if hot
is used in the sense of spicy or cold if
hot is used in the sense of warm or it
can be even unattractive if cot is used
in the sense of attractive so depending
on the sense of hot we may have
different antonyms another example is
the following the immediate hyper name
of bar can be one of many among others
that it can be a home musical notation
obstruction profession and so on
depending on the sense of bar as a
result people in the community use the
terms in set to group together all the
synonyms of the same word if a word is
polysemous it may be associated with
multiple senses so this takes us to word
net word net is a special database of
lexical relationships between words in
English that was created at Princeton
University over the years it was started
by George Miller or who unfortunately
passed away a couple of years ago and
this project is now run by Christian FL
Bob Stewart Princeton University it
includes a large database of words in
English
mainly nouns in verse but also a trivial
number of adjectives and adverbs and it
also includes the semantic relationships
between them
the main relation in word net is hyper
enemy so the overall structure the
database is more tree-like
the next slide will show an example of a
small subsection of the word net tree
now we're net is one of the most
valuable resources in natural language
processing and I would like to encourage
everybody to look at the two references
that are listed here one is a collection
of papers by edited by Christian FL bomb
and one is an introductory article about
word net by George Miller himself in the
communications of the ACM about 20 years
ago so in this example I'm going to show
you a small sub tree of word net that
matches the relationship between
different animals so you can see that
the word ungulate is shown on top
ungulates are divided into even-toed
ungulates and odd-toed ungulates and all
tolled ungulates include equines and
others i'm only showing the equines here
equines are mostly horses but other
related animals also belong here such as
mules and zebras and then I also have an
example of an object that is more
specific than a horse in this case Pony
on the left hand side we have okapis
deer and giraffes that are all examples
of ruminants and Alcoa PT and caribou
which are all examples of deer so just
to remind you a deer is a hyper name for
caribou and caribou is a hype or name
for deer let's look at some examples of
word net the word bar in word net has 11
senses they are not sorted in any
particular way but often the first few
are the most frequent senses so bar Nome
bar saloon gin mill taproom are all
words in the same scene set as bar in
the sense of a room where alcoholic
drinks are served over counter the
second sense of bar is the actual
counter where you can purchase food or
drink
the third sense is a rigid piece of
metal for example an iron bar the fourth
sense is measure and music
so it's definition is a notation for
repeating pattern of musical beats
written followed by a vertical bar and
so on there are many other sciences of
bar now the verb bar as opposed to the
noun bar also has four sentences let's
just look at one or two of them the
first one is 2 bar to exclude as in he
was barred for membership in the club
the second sense is the same as
barricade block blockade block or lockup
it means to render something else Oota
before passage so barricade the streets
or to bar the streets in the first sense
of bar it's closest a hyper name is home
then the hyper name of room is area the
hypernym of area is a structure or
construction than artifact then object
and and entity so entity is one of the
root categories in the word net
hierarchy I should say that we're net is
not really a tree I misspoke early it's
more like a forest because it has
multiple roots entity or something is
one of them I will show you some others
later in the second sense of bar a bar
is a high point above counter which is a
hyper name of a table a piece of
furniture and so on and it all goes back
to entity or something so it goes back
to the same root note and let's briefly
look at some of the other
interpretations of bar so a bar is an
implement an implement is a type of
instrumentation and instrumentation is a
type of artifact and now we go back to
entity now in the fourth sense we have
now an abstract concept so bar in the
sense of a musical notation is a hyper
name of a notational system which is a -
I'm of written communication and so on
all the way to abstraction so that takes
us to another root note in the word net
forest and let's briefly look at some
other examples since five takes us to
entities and six takes us to an act
human action or human activity seven is
again an abstraction eight goes to
entity and nine goes to group or
grouping and
goes back to entity something some other
properties of words in word not include
familiarity and polysemy this slide is
going to show examples of both the
left-hand side of the slide shows you
the familiarity of certain words and the
right-hand side shows with their
polysemy polysemy as the name indicates
means number of senses poly means many
semi means senses
so the polysemy count of the word board
used as a noun is 9 for bar earlier it
was 10 or 11 now for familiarity the
word board used as a noun is familiar so
that's a very common category the other
categories available are common and
uncommon and also rare and very rare so
the word second deputy for example is
very rare now one thing that you may
notice based on this example which is
also true in general is that more common
words are also more familiar and also
have more senses like an example here
the word board is very familiar and it
also has a high polysemy count so there
are other lexical networks in addition
to word net that I want to bring up
here's a sampling of those your net has
multiple European languages such as
Spanish and French and German and I
would like to emphasize that there exist
many including many open-source external
thesaurus or language resources that can
be used in natural language processing
in ways similar to word net and
different databases that can be
incorporated in natural language systems
for example open thesaurus
freebase dbpedia Babel net and various
this or I and in case you're wondering
what this or I means it's the floor of
the source and thesaurus is just a
special kind of dictionary that tells
you which words are similar or related
to other words so here's an example of
Babel net or Babel net this is for the
word song as you can see it tells you in
different languages what are the usages
of this word and it contains links to
definitions of that word in multiple
languages mesh is another interesting
higher
our key of concepts it's used in the
medical literature mesh does stand for
medical subject headings and it includes
concepts such as diseases drugs body
parts Syrah and so on and the link at
the bottom shows you how you can access
mesh mesh can be freely downloaded and
is used a lot in the biomedical natural
language processing community so this
concludes the section on wordnet and
related lexical networks we're going to
continue in a moment with the next
section which is on the source based
word similarity methods